README.md, before:

# Django Channels based WebSocket GraphQL server with Graphene-like subscriptions

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/django-channels-graphql-ws.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/django-channels-graphql-ws/) [![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/django-channels-graphql-ws.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/django-channels-graphql-ws/) [![Code style](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-black.svg)](https://github.com/ambv/black) [![PyPI - License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/django-channels-graphql-ws.svg)](https://github.com/datadvance/DjangoChannelsGraphqlWs/blob/master/LICENSE)

- [Django Channels based WebSocket GraphQL server with Graphene-like subscriptions](#django-channels-based-websocket-graphql-server-with-graphene-like-subscriptions)
    - [Features](#features)
    - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Getting started](#getting-started)
    - [Details](#details)
        - [Automatic Django model serialization](#automatic-django-model-serialization)
        - [Execution](#execution)
        - [Authentication](#authentication)
        - [Testing](#testing)
        - [Subscription activation confirmation](#subscription-activation-confirmation)
    - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Development](#development)
    - [Contributing](#contributing)
    - [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

## Features

- WebSocket-based GraphQL server implemented on the Django Channels.
- Graphene-like subscriptions.
- All GraphQL requests are processed concurrently (in parallel).
- Subscription notifications delivered in the order they were issued.
- Optional subscription activation message can be sent to a client.
  Sometimes this is necessary to avoid race conditions on the client
  side. Consider the case when client subscribes to some subscription
  and immediately invokes a mutations which triggers this subscription.
  In such case the subscription notification can be lost, cause these
  subscription and mutation requests are processed concurrently. To
  avoid this client shall wait for the subscription activation before
  sending such mutation request.
- Customizable notification strategies:
    - A subscription can be put to one or many subscription groups. This
      allows to granularly notify only selected clients, or, looking
      from the client's perspective - to subscribe to some selected
      source of events. For example, imaginary subscription
      "OnNewMessage" may accept argument "user" so subscription will
      only trigger on new messages from the selected user.
    - Notification can be suppressed in the subscription resolver method
      `publish`. For example, this is useful to avoid sending
      self-notifications.
- All GraphQL "resolvers" run in a threadpool so they never block the
  server itself and may communicate with database or perform other
  blocking tasks.
- Clients for the GraphQL WebSocket server:
    - AIOHTTP-based client.
    - Client for unit test based on the Django Channels testing
      communicator.

## Installation

```bash
pip install django-channels-graphql-ws
```

## Getting started

Create a GraphQL schema using Graphene. Note the `MySubscription` class.

```python
import channels_graphql_ws
import graphene

class MySubscription(channels_graphql_ws.Subscription):
    """Simple GraphQL subscription."""

    # Subscription payload.
    event = graphene.String()

    class Arguments:
        """That is how subscription arguments are defined."""
        arg1 = graphene.String()
        arg2 = graphene.String()

    @staticmethod
    def subscribe(root, info, arg1, arg2):
        """Called when user subscribes."""

        # Return the list of subscription group names.
        return ['group42']

    @staticmethod
    def publish(payload, info, arg1, arg2):
        """Called to notify the client."""

        # Here `payload` contains the `payload` from the `broadcast()`
        # invocation (see below). You can return `MySubscription.SKIP`
        # if you wish to suppress the notification to a particular
        # client. For example, this allows to avoid notifications for
        # the actions made by this particular client.

        return MySubscription(event='Something has happened!')

class Query(graphene.ObjectType):
    """Root GraphQL query."""
    # Check Graphene docs to see how to define queries.
    pass

class Mutation(graphene.ObjectType):
    """Root GraphQL mutation."""
    # Check Graphene docs to see how to define mutations.
    pass

class Subscription(graphene.ObjectType):
    """Root GraphQL subscription."""
    my_subscription = MySubscription.Field()

graphql_schema = graphene.Schema(
    query=Query,
    mutation=Mutation,
    subscription=Subscription,
)
```

Make your own WebSocket consumer subclass and set the schema it serves:

```python
class MyGraphqlWsConsumer(channels_graphql_ws.GraphqlWsConsumer):
    """Channels WebSocket consumer which provides GraphQL API."""
    schema = graphql_schema

    # Uncomment to send keepalive message every 42 seconds.
    # send_keepalive_every = 42

    # Uncomment to process requests sequentially (useful for tests).
    # strict_ordering = True

    async def on_connect(self, payload):
        """New client connection handler."""
        # You can `raise` from here to reject the connection.
        print("New client connected!")
```

Setup Django Channels routing:

```python
application = channels.routing.ProtocolTypeRouter({
    'websocket': channels.routing.URLRouter([
        django.urls.path('graphql/', MyGraphqlWsConsumer),
    ])
})
```

Notify clients when some event happens using the `broadcast()`
or `broadcast_sync()` method from the OS thread where
there is no running event loop:

```python
MySubscription.broadcast(
    # Subscription group to notify clients in.
    group='group42',
    # Dict delivered to the `publish` method.
    payload={},
)
```

Notify clients in an coroutine function using the `broadcast()`
or `broadcast_async()` method:

```python
await MySubscription.broadcast(
    # Subscription group to notify clients in.
    group='group42',
    # Dict delivered to the `publish` method.
    payload={},
)
```

## Details

The `channels_graphql_ws` module provides the following key classes:

- `GraphqlWsConsumer`: Django Channels WebSocket consumer which
    maintains WebSocket connection with the client.
- `Subscription`: Subclass this to define GraphQL subscription. Very
    similar to defining mutations with Graphene. (The class itself is a
    "creative" copy of the Graphene `Mutation` class.)
- `GraphqlWsClient`: A client for the GraphQL backend. Executes strings
    with queries and receives subscription notifications.
- `GraphqlWsTransport`: WebSocket transport interface for the client.
- `GraphqlWsTransportAiohttp`: WebSocket transport implemented on the
    [AIOHTTP](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiohttp) library.

For details check the [source code](channels_graphql_ws/) which is
thoroughly commented. The docstrings of classes are especially useful.

Since the WebSocket handling is based on the Django Channels and
subscriptions are implemented in the Graphene-like style it is
recommended to have a look the documentation of these great projects:

- [Django Channels](http://channels.readthedocs.io)
- [Graphene](http://graphene-python.org/)

The implemented WebSocket-based protocol was taken from the library
[subscription-transport-ws](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws)
which is used by the [Apollo GraphQL](https://github.com/apollographql).
Check the [protocol description](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md)
for details.

### Automatic Django model serialization

The `Subscription.broadcast` uses Channels groups to deliver a message
to the `Subscription`'s `publish` method. [ASGI specification](https://github.com/django/asgiref/blob/master/specs/asgi.rst#events)
clearly states what can be sent over a channel, and Django models are
not in the list. Since it is common to notify clients about Django
models changes we manually serialize the `payload` using [MessagePack](https://github.com/msgpack/msgpack-python)
and hack the process to automatically serialize Django models following
the the Django's guide [Serializing Django objects](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/serialization/).

### Execution

- Different requests from different WebSocket client are processed
  asynchronously.
- By default different requests (WebSocket messages) from a single
  client are processed concurrently in different worker threads. (It is
  possible to change the maximum number of worker threads with the
  `max_worker_threads` setting.) So there is no guarantee that requests
  will be processed in the same the client sent these requests.
  Actually, with HTTP we have this behavior for decades.
- It is possible to serialize message processing by setting
  `strict_ordering` to `True`. But note, this disables parallel requests
  execution - in other words, the server will not start processing
  another request from the client before it finishes the current one.
  See comments in the class `GraphqlWsConsumer`.
- All subscription notifications are delivered in the order they were
  issued.

### Authentication

Implementing authentication is straightforward. Follow
[the Channels documentation](https://channels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/topics/authentication.html).

Here is an example. Note the `channels.auth.AuthMiddlewareStack` class.

```python
application = channels.routing.ProtocolTypeRouter({
    'websocket': channels.auth.AuthMiddlewareStack(
        channels.routing.URLRouter([
            django.urls.path('graphql/', MyGraphqlWsConsumer),
        ])
    ),
})
```

This gives you a Django user `info.context.user` in all the resolvers.

### The client

There is the `GraphqlWsClient` which implements GraphQL client working
over the WebSockets. The client needs a transport instance which
communicates with the server. Transport is an implementation of the
`GraphqlWsTransport` interface (class must be derived from it). There is
the `GraphqlWsTransportAiohttp` which implements the transport on the
[AIOHTTP](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiohttp) library. Here is an
example:

```python
transport = channels_graphql_ws.GraphqlWsTransportAiohttp(
    "ws://backend.endpoint/graphql/", cookies={"sessionid": session_id}
)
client = channels_graphql_ws.GraphqlWsClient(transport)
await client.connect_and_init()
result = await client.execute("query { users { id login email name } }")
users = result["data"]
await client.finalize()
```

See the `GraphqlWsClient` class docstring for the details.

### Testing

To test GraphQL WebSocket API read the [appropriate page in the Channels
documentation](https://channels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/topics/testing.html).

In order to simplify unit testing there is a `GraphqlWsTransport`
implementation based on the Django Channels testing communicator:
`channels_graphql_ws.testing.GraphqlWsTransportChannels`. Check its
docstring and take a look at the [tests](/tests) to see how to use it.

### Subscription activation confirmation

The original Apollo's protocol does not allow client to know when a
subscription activates. This inevitably leads to the race conditions on
the client side. Sometimes it is not that crucial, but there are cases
when this leads to serious issues. [Here is the discussion](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws/issues/451)
in the [`subscriptions-transport-ws`](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws)
tracker.

To solve this problem, there is the `GraphqlWsConsumer` setting
`confirm_subscriptions` which when set to `True` will make the consumer
issue an additional `data` message which confirms the subscription
activation. Please note, you have to modify the client's code to make it
consume this message, otherwise it will be mistakenly considered as the
first subscription notification.

To customize the confirmation message itself set the `GraphqlWsConsumer`
setting `subscription_confirmation_message`. It must be a dictionary
with two keys `"data"` and `"errors"`. By default it is set to
`{"data": None, "errors": None}`.

## Alternatives

There is a [Tomáš Ehrlich](https://gist.github.com/tricoder42)
GitHubGist [GraphQL Subscription with django-channels](https://gist.github.com/tricoder42/af3d0337c1b33d82c1b32d12bd0265ec)
which this implementation was initially based on.

There is a promising [GraphQL WS](https://github.com/graphql-python/graphql-ws)
library by the Graphene authors. In particular
[this pull request](https://github.com/graphql-python/graphql-ws/pull/9)
gives a hope that there will be native Graphene implementation of the
WebSocket transport with subscriptions one day.

## Development

Just a reminder of how to setup an environment for the development:

```bash
> python3 -m venv .venv
> direnv allow
> pip install poetry
> poetry install
> pre-commit install
> pytest
```

Use:

[![Code style: black](
    https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg
)](
    https://github.com/ambv/black
)

## Contributing

This project is developed and maintained by DATADVANCE LLC. Please
submit an issue if you have any questions or want to suggest an
improvement.

## Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research
(project No. 15-29-07043).

Commit message:

Added support for async `publish` & `subscribe`.

README.md, after:

# Django Channels based WebSocket GraphQL server with Graphene-like subscriptions

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/django-channels-graphql-ws.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/django-channels-graphql-ws/) [![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/django-channels-graphql-ws.svg)](https://pypi.org/project/django-channels-graphql-ws/) [![Code style](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-black.svg)](https://github.com/ambv/black) [![PyPI - License](https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/django-channels-graphql-ws.svg)](https://github.com/datadvance/DjangoChannelsGraphqlWs/blob/master/LICENSE)

- [Django Channels based WebSocket GraphQL server with Graphene-like subscriptions](#django-channels-based-websocket-graphql-server-with-graphene-like-subscriptions)
    - [Features](#features)
    - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Getting started](#getting-started)
    - [Details](#details)
        - [Automatic Django model serialization](#automatic-django-model-serialization)
        - [Execution](#execution)
        - [Authentication](#authentication)
        - [Testing](#testing)
        - [Subscription activation confirmation](#subscription-activation-confirmation)
    - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Development](#development)
    - [Contributing](#contributing)
    - [Acknowledgements](#acknowledgements)

## Features

- WebSocket-based GraphQL server implemented on the Django Channels.
- Graphene-like subscriptions.
- All GraphQL requests are processed concurrently (in parallel).
- Subscription notifications delivered in the order they were issued.
- Optional subscription activation message can be sent to a client.
  Sometimes this is necessary to avoid race conditions on the client
  side. Consider the case when client subscribes to some subscription
  and immediately invokes a mutations which triggers this subscription.
  In such case the subscription notification can be lost, cause these
  subscription and mutation requests are processed concurrently. To
  avoid this client shall wait for the subscription activation before
  sending such mutation request.
- Customizable notification strategies:
    - A subscription can be put to one or many subscription groups. This
      allows to granularly notify only selected clients, or, looking
      from the client's perspective - to subscribe to some selected
      source of events. For example, imaginary subscription
      "OnNewMessage" may accept argument "user" so subscription will
      only trigger on new messages from the selected user.
    - Notification can be suppressed in the subscription resolver method
      `publish`. For example, this is useful to avoid sending
      self-notifications.
- All GraphQL "resolvers" run in a threadpool so they never block the
  server itself and may communicate with database or perform other
  blocking tasks.
- Resolvers (including subscription's `subscribe` & `publish`) can be
  represented both as synchronous or asynchronous (`async def`) methods.
- Subscription notifications can be sent from both synchronous and
  asynchronous contexts. Just call `MySubscription.broadcast()` or
  `await MySubscription.broadcast()` depending on the context.
- Clients for the GraphQL WebSocket server:
    - AIOHTTP-based client.
    - Client for unit test based on the Django Channels testing
      communicator.

## Installation

```bash
pip install django-channels-graphql-ws
```

## Getting started

Create a GraphQL schema using Graphene. Note the `MySubscription` class.

```python
import channels_graphql_ws
import graphene

class MySubscription(channels_graphql_ws.Subscription):
    """Simple GraphQL subscription."""

    # Subscription payload.
    event = graphene.String()

    class Arguments:
        """That is how subscription arguments are defined."""
        arg1 = graphene.String()
        arg2 = graphene.String()

    @staticmethod
    def subscribe(root, info, arg1, arg2):
        """Called when user subscribes."""

        # Return the list of subscription group names.
        return ['group42']

    @staticmethod
    def publish(payload, info, arg1, arg2):
        """Called to notify the client."""

        # Here `payload` contains the `payload` from the `broadcast()`
        # invocation (see below). You can return `MySubscription.SKIP`
        # if you wish to suppress the notification to a particular
        # client. For example, this allows to avoid notifications for
        # the actions made by this particular client.

        return MySubscription(event='Something has happened!')

class Query(graphene.ObjectType):
    """Root GraphQL query."""
    # Check Graphene docs to see how to define queries.
    pass

class Mutation(graphene.ObjectType):
    """Root GraphQL mutation."""
    # Check Graphene docs to see how to define mutations.
    pass

class Subscription(graphene.ObjectType):
    """Root GraphQL subscription."""
    my_subscription = MySubscription.Field()

graphql_schema = graphene.Schema(
    query=Query,
    mutation=Mutation,
    subscription=Subscription,
)
```

Make your own WebSocket consumer subclass and set the schema it serves:

```python
class MyGraphqlWsConsumer(channels_graphql_ws.GraphqlWsConsumer):
    """Channels WebSocket consumer which provides GraphQL API."""
    schema = graphql_schema

    # Uncomment to send keepalive message every 42 seconds.
    # send_keepalive_every = 42

    # Uncomment to process requests sequentially (useful for tests).
    # strict_ordering = True

    async def on_connect(self, payload):
        """New client connection handler."""
        # You can `raise` from here to reject the connection.
        print("New client connected!")
```

Setup Django Channels routing:

```python
application = channels.routing.ProtocolTypeRouter({
    'websocket': channels.routing.URLRouter([
        django.urls.path('graphql/', MyGraphqlWsConsumer),
    ])
})
```

Notify clients when some event happens using the `broadcast()`
or `broadcast_sync()` method from the OS thread where
there is no running event loop:

```python
MySubscription.broadcast(
    # Subscription group to notify clients in.
    group='group42',
    # Dict delivered to the `publish` method.
    payload={},
)
```

Notify clients in an coroutine function using the `broadcast()`
or `broadcast_async()` method:

```python
await MySubscription.broadcast(
    # Subscription group to notify clients in.
    group='group42',
    # Dict delivered to the `publish` method.
    payload={},
)
```

## Details

The `channels_graphql_ws` module provides the following key classes:

- `GraphqlWsConsumer`: Django Channels WebSocket consumer which
    maintains WebSocket connection with the client.
- `Subscription`: Subclass this to define GraphQL subscription. Very
    similar to defining mutations with Graphene. (The class itself is a
    "creative" copy of the Graphene `Mutation` class.)
- `GraphqlWsClient`: A client for the GraphQL backend. Executes strings
    with queries and receives subscription notifications.
- `GraphqlWsTransport`: WebSocket transport interface for the client.
- `GraphqlWsTransportAiohttp`: WebSocket transport implemented on the
    [AIOHTTP](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiohttp) library.

For details check the [source code](channels_graphql_ws/) which is
thoroughly commented. The docstrings of classes are especially useful.

Since the WebSocket handling is based on the Django Channels and
subscriptions are implemented in the Graphene-like style it is
recommended to have a look the documentation of these great projects:

- [Django Channels](http://channels.readthedocs.io)
- [Graphene](http://graphene-python.org/)

The implemented WebSocket-based protocol was taken from the library
[subscription-transport-ws](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws)
which is used by the [Apollo GraphQL](https://github.com/apollographql).
Check the [protocol description](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md)
for details.

### Automatic Django model serialization

The `Subscription.broadcast` uses Channels groups to deliver a message
to the `Subscription`'s `publish` method. [ASGI specification](https://github.com/django/asgiref/blob/master/specs/asgi.rst#events)
clearly states what can be sent over a channel, and Django models are
not in the list. Since it is common to notify clients about Django
models changes we manually serialize the `payload` using [MessagePack](https://github.com/msgpack/msgpack-python)
and hack the process to automatically serialize Django models following
the the Django's guide [Serializing Django objects](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/serialization/).

### Execution

- Different requests from different WebSocket client are processed
  asynchronously.
- By default different requests (WebSocket messages) from a single
  client are processed concurrently in different worker threads. (It is
  possible to change the maximum number of worker threads with the
  `max_worker_threads` setting.) So there is no guarantee that requests
  will be processed in the same the client sent these requests.
  Actually, with HTTP we have this behavior for decades.
- It is possible to serialize message processing by setting
  `strict_ordering` to `True`. But note, this disables parallel requests
  execution - in other words, the server will not start processing
  another request from the client before it finishes the current one.
  See comments in the class `GraphqlWsConsumer`.
- All subscription notifications are delivered in the order they were
  issued.

### Authentication

Implementing authentication is straightforward. Follow
[the Channels documentation](https://channels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/topics/authentication.html).

Here is an example. Note the `channels.auth.AuthMiddlewareStack` class.

```python
application = channels.routing.ProtocolTypeRouter({
    'websocket': channels.auth.AuthMiddlewareStack(
        channels.routing.URLRouter([
            django.urls.path('graphql/', MyGraphqlWsConsumer),
        ])
    ),
})
```

This gives you a Django user `info.context.user` in all the resolvers.

### The client

There is the `GraphqlWsClient` which implements GraphQL client working
over the WebSockets. The client needs a transport instance which
communicates with the server. Transport is an implementation of the
`GraphqlWsTransport` interface (class must be derived from it). There is
the `GraphqlWsTransportAiohttp` which implements the transport on the
[AIOHTTP](https://github.com/aio-libs/aiohttp) library. Here is an
example:

```python
transport = channels_graphql_ws.GraphqlWsTransportAiohttp(
    "ws://backend.endpoint/graphql/", cookies={"sessionid": session_id}
)
client = channels_graphql_ws.GraphqlWsClient(transport)
await client.connect_and_init()
result = await client.execute("query { users { id login email name } }")
users = result["data"]
await client.finalize()
```

See the `GraphqlWsClient` class docstring for the details.

### Testing

To test GraphQL WebSocket API read the [appropriate page in the Channels
documentation](https://channels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/topics/testing.html).

In order to simplify unit testing there is a `GraphqlWsTransport`
implementation based on the Django Channels testing communicator:
`channels_graphql_ws.testing.GraphqlWsTransportChannels`. Check its
docstring and take a look at the [tests](/tests) to see how to use it.

### Subscription activation confirmation

The original Apollo's protocol does not allow client to know when a
subscription activates. This inevitably leads to the race conditions on
the client side. Sometimes it is not that crucial, but there are cases
when this leads to serious issues. [Here is the discussion](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws/issues/451)
in the [`subscriptions-transport-ws`](https://github.com/apollographql/subscriptions-transport-ws)
tracker.

To solve this problem, there is the `GraphqlWsConsumer` setting
`confirm_subscriptions` which when set to `True` will make the consumer
issue an additional `data` message which confirms the subscription
activation. Please note, you have to modify the client's code to make it
consume this message, otherwise it will be mistakenly considered as the
first subscription notification.

To customize the confirmation message itself set the `GraphqlWsConsumer`
setting `subscription_confirmation_message`. It must be a dictionary
with two keys `"data"` and `"errors"`. By default it is set to
`{"data": None, "errors": None}`.

## Alternatives

There is a [Tomáš Ehrlich](https://gist.github.com/tricoder42)
GitHubGist [GraphQL Subscription with django-channels](https://gist.github.com/tricoder42/af3d0337c1b33d82c1b32d12bd0265ec)
which this implementation was initially based on.

There is a promising [GraphQL WS](https://github.com/graphql-python/graphql-ws)
library by the Graphene authors. In particular
[this pull request](https://github.com/graphql-python/graphql-ws/pull/9)
gives a hope that there will be native Graphene implementation of the
WebSocket transport with subscriptions one day.

## Development

Just a reminder of how to setup an environment for the development:

```bash
> python3 -m venv .venv
> direnv allow
> pip install poetry
> poetry install
> pre-commit install
> pytest
```

Use:

[![Code style: black](
    https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg
)](
    https://github.com/ambv/black
)

## Contributing

This project is developed and maintained by DATADVANCE LLC. Please
submit an issue if you have any questions or want to suggest an
improvement.

## Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research
(project No. 15-29-07043).
